How does Ramayana explain complex concepts of Yoga, including Prana, Guna, Energy, Consciousness and much more?

Ramayana explains Yoga concepts and their relationships in a story. The characters represent fundamental concepts of Yoga. 
Hanuman is a representation of Prana. We take Prana from the air, and in Ramayana, he is a son of Air god (Vayu). One of the crucial roles of Prana is to find dormant Energy locked up in the Muladhara Chakra. Main task of Hanuman was to find Sita, who was locked up in Lanka. 
In Yoga, Energy lies dormant in Muladhara Chakra because our Ahamkara does not let it go. Ravana abducted Sita and took her to Lanka. Therefore, Ravana represents our Ahamkara and Lanka represents Muladhara chakra. The root letter of Muladhara Chakra is Lam, from which we get Lanka.
Sita went through fire because she represents Energy, and fire is a form of Energy. Physics tells us that Energy cannot be created or destroyed. Sita was not born normal, and she vanished into the earth. Thus, Sita represents Energy. In Yoga’s terminology, Energy unites with Consciousness. Therefore, Shri Ram represents Consciousness.
When we do Pranayama, our body generates a lot of heat. In Ramayana, after finding Sita in Lanka, Hanuman sets a fire in Lanka. Thus, burning of Lanka is an important warning sign give to Yogis. Ramayana offers extensive guidance on Pranayama thru character of Hanumana.
In Samkhya, we learn about three Guna – Rajas, Tamas, and Sattva. A Tamas Guna dominated person has a tendency of overeating, oversleeping, and overindulgence in sensual pleasures. This person resists any call to action. Kumbhakarna represents Tamas Guna. He eats for six months and sleeps for the remaining six months. Through Vibhishana, Ramayana explains Sattva Guna. It is attracted towards Consciousness and spirituality. It tries to search for God or higher power or purpose. Rajas Guna pushes us into action, whether physical or mental. In Ramayana, Ravan is a highly active demon. Therefore, he represents Rajas Guna. 
Shri Ram defeats Ravana but does not become king of Lanka. Shri Ram neutralizes Kumbhakarna. He befriends Vibhishana, uses him, and rewards him too. However, Shri Ram steps away from Vibhishana too and goes to Ayodhya. In other words, Consciousness is not the same as these three qualities of nature. It is “above and beyond” them and will always remain that way. Gita mentions it, and Ramayana helps us understand it.
Since Mandodari gives proper advice to Ravana and keeps composure in a distressing situation, she represents Rationalizing Intellect (Buddhi). Ahamkara and the Rationalizing Intellect together create the Mind. By substitution of words, we get - Ravana (Ahamkara) and Mandodari (Rationalizing Intellect) together gave birth to (creation) Indrajit (Mind). 
Indrajit as the mind fits perfectly with the character of Indrajit. Indra word comes from Indriya, which means sense organs. The mind can control the sense organs, which is why his name means “one who won Indra (who represents sense organs).” 
In Ramayana, Lakshmana kills Indrajit. Lakshya means focused. Lakshmana represents Devoted Mind. Hence, we Indrajit represent an “Opposite of Devoted Mind” component of mind. 
Look at any image or idol of Shri Ram. It is a beautiful depiction of the secret message given to us through Ramayana. 
If we find the Energy (Sita), the Consciousness (Shri Ram) will come searching for Energy (Sita), and we will find the Consciousness (Shri Ram)!
If we have a Devoted Mind (Lakshmana) on the Consciousness (Shri Ram), it will lead us directly to the Consciousness (Shri Ram)!
Optionally, we can find the Prana (Hanumana), by doing Pranayama. The Prana (Hanuman) will find the Energy (Sita) in Muladhara Chakra (Lanka), and we will then find the Energy (Sita) within our body. When the Consciousness (Shri Ram) comes down to find the Energy (Sita), it (He) will reveal itself (Himself) to us automatically!
Welcome to the mysterious world of Ramayana!