
Yoga and Ramayana are the two sides of same coin. When we begin from the perspective of Yoga, we realize that Ramayana is an expression of the concepts mentioned in Yoga. Similarly, when we read Ramayana, we learn about Yoga. 
In Valmiki Ramayana, verse 6-117-20 clearly tells us “Shri Ram is AUM.” In other words, Shri Ram represents the Universal Consciousness. However, most of us are unable to see the correlation between Shri Ram and Universal Consciousness. The reason is we do not have sufficient knowledge about either of them. 
We are going to read the Ramayana and Yoga side by side. When we replace characters of Ramayana with Yoga concepts, we get a very different view of Ramayana. In turn, we learn a lot about the Yoga concept from Ramayana. 
We see that the Ramayana explains difficult concepts of Yoga in easy to understand story. Its characters represent different concepts of Yoga. It provides very valuable signs, symptoms, recommended actions, warnings, etc. on a path of Yoga. Thus, it leads us safely towards the Universal Consciousness.  
Reader Responds: I have so many basic questions about Ramayana. 


Why Do We Have to Change? How Can We Change Effectively? 
All we know is to run and run. The nature of our ego/Ahamkar is that it constantly wants to achieve something. It cannot stay still. First, we run toward money, fame, power, or whatever. Then, someone tells us about Spirituality and we run toward that Spirituality! 
Just as a mad person knows only madness, the only thing, we know is the action of the pursuit. We want what we want. There is not going to be any compromise on that. From the time to time, the things we want may change, but there is no change in our wanting, demanding and greedy nature.
An eastern tuned mind may ask, “How then can we change? Where is the source of change? We continue to be the same person, and there is no scope for change.” 
In a similar way, a western tuned mind may ask, “Why do we have to change? What is wrong with our present conditions? Why do we need to lose interest in sense-objects? Why make ourselves dull? Are we not on the earth to enjoy our life to the fullest possible extent? Why turn ourselves into a vegetable state, in which we cannot enjoy anything at all? We seek freedom, and we are not interested in tying us up to rules that constantly tell us what to do. We seek a healthy body and a healthy mind. We do not care about enlightenment and things like that. Furthermore, we need tangible results of the efforts we make. We are not interested in cashing a check in the heaven or the next life. In addition, are our current systems of rituals and religious setup not sufficient? Do we have to get into the new system, learn it, and then practice it?”


Bhastrika, or “bellows breath,”

The questions the western tuned mind asks arise in the eastern mind as well. Charwak, whose name translates into “a sweet talker,” has challenged the entire eastern thinking. Despite that, the east has given him the status of a sage. Sage Valmiki foresaw both eastern-minded questions and western-minded questions, and he wrote Ramayana to ask and answer these kinds of questions.


A value is NOT a custom or tradition. For example, how we greet each other or the way we dress fall under custom or tradition. Values are also NOT a belief. Beliefs are a way of a culture to understand natural events on which it has no control. Some of the examples of the beliefs are striking of lightning, howling of an owl, Friday the 13th etc.  




A)	Life as a Cycle: For a Yogi, the creation and de-creation are two processes that follow each other like day and night. The Universal Consciousness creates the creation because of its wish to be many. Later, its wish to know itself, which leads the consciousness back to the Universal Consciousness again. The consciousness changes its level from very gross to extremely subtle in de-creation; the opposite happens in creation. These two processes that feed each other and continuously seek each other, creating a sort of rhythmic dance. 
B)	We Are Always Dying And Being Born Again: Because of the cyclic nature, birth and death are not two different points on a linear time scale, but, inseparable from each other. In other words, a Yogi does not see the “chicken or egg first” type of problems. For them, the chicken is in the process of being an egg and the egg is in process of being a chicken. 
C)	Questioning and Value of Doubt: 
D)	




	Let us take a simple analogy. Imagine that you are going on a mountain trek, where the trail is not so clear and safe. It happens to be a dark night. Somehow you have lost the source of light. With some element of luck, a traveller come across and lends you a fire to ignite a small lantern. The lantern is so small that you get visibility of just one step ahead. 	
	The traveler, who lends you fire to ignite your lantern, is a guru. Without a guru, there would be no fire to light the lantern with. The eastern cultures give immense importance to guru. Only he can lift the veil of darkness. The word "gu" means darkness and "ru" means one who drives away. Thus, guru is a person who drives darkness away. A guru need not do anything else, like hold your hand, or walk a few steps with you. Once he lights your lantern, he can simply walk away. The eastern cultures have seen many gurus who did not spend any time with a disciple or did not teach anything to the disciple. Nevertheless, the disciple learned a lot from the guru and achieved the highest state of consciousness because of the guru. 
	There is no parallel concept of a guru in the western cultures. We do however, hear of the stock market gurus, interior design gurus, etc. The use of the word guru as a synonym of expert is not correct. An expert is a teacher, not a guru. 
	A teacher teaches new things. But, he always relies on the logical capabilities of the student. Theoretically, a student can learn the same thing all by himself. Only it would take a long time. 
	A guru brings in a whole new quality or dimension to his disciple. It is something that a disciple cannot even imagine or acquire by himself. 
	A teacher’s livelihood may or may not depend upon teaching, but there is always some form of fees or barter for his services. On the other hand, a guru stands beyond all means and ways his disciples can repay him in any form. Except his sincere desire to change himself, the disciple cannot bring anything else to a guru. A disciple does bring unwanted chaos with him, but the guru manages to establish order within the disciple. 
	Just as there is a difference between a teacher and a guru, there is a difference between a student and a disciple. A student is looking to gain something, like knowledge, but a disciple is looking to lose something. 
	Interestingly, a guru may initially play the role of the teacher, as he knows that students are curious. The guru uses this curiosity as a tool to transform the student into a disciple. It is the compassion of a guru, which makes him come down from an unimaginable higher level to the level of the disciple. Do not be attached to his logical assertions, because he intends to use them to take the disciple to somewhere beyond logic.








Before we attempt to understand the process of creation, we need to note the following six important points about it.
•	Yogis do not see the process of creation as “one time” event, which is entirely different from science. In science, Big Bang happened 13 billion years ago, and scientists surely do not hope to see this kind of an explosion ever again. In Yoga, both creation and de-creation are simultaneous processes. De-creation, as its name suggests, is the opposite of creation. It reverses everything that is created during creation and takes yogis directly to the universal consciousness as it was before creation happened. Thus, yogis witness this world as both real and unreal, at the same time. For them, creation happens, and de-creation happens too. In other words, when we follow the process of creation, we come to the real world, the way we know it. When we follow the process of de-creation of the real world, we witness the world as unreal, just as the yogis see it. We will see the details of the process of de-creation later on in this chapter.
•	Unlike scientists, yogis are not too interested in how the creation came into existence. Their focus is on the process of de-creation. They wish to witness this world as unreal within themselves, which happens when they experience the universal consciousness. 
•	Yogis know that trying to understand the process of creation/de-creation has never helped anyone experience de-creation within themselves. Therefore, if someone were to say that learning about creation is a futile exercise, then I would agree, except for some rare individuals. For a very few people, who have experienced the universal consciousness but cannot understand it, this is critical information, or at least, an important piece of a complex puzzle of spirituality. Without this information, they will not know that they need to begin their search in the direction related to Yoga. Without the conceptual understanding, they may confuse the real experience with a dream or hallucination, and may ignore the experience.
•	
•	In addition to not believing in one answer, we note that within Yoga, there are many different theories or explanations as to how creation came into existence, and this does not bother yogis. The one mentioned in the previous pages is a commonly accepted theory, but it does contradict with other theories. Yogis give these theories to persons who need these types of answers, who will not make any efforts in the absence of these theories. As long as a person is ready to test and walk on the path of Yoga, it does not matter which theory it is that induces a person to walk. Even with all these caveats, there will always be some, who will question and find holes in the theory. There is no way to give satisfactory answers to questions, which are asked for the sake of questioning. Questions originate from a certain level of intelligence. Until that level changes, questions do not go away. One may think one is asking a different question, but the answer does not satisfy, and the next question arises. Yogis try to avoid the endless intellectual question-answer games and encourage us to experience the reality within us. They ask us to have basic information about the framework and then to try see the framework operating within us. Once a person gets even a rudimentary experience, he will try to understand it using the framework. This process will change the level of intelligence of that person, and eventually, all his doubts will fade away. For a person who is serious about understanding Yoga and must use logic, there is a different branch of Yoga. This branch deals with questions and answers, and through them, attempts to show the reality to that person. 
•	A description of how the world came into existence comes from Yoga’s point of view. Yoga, in itself, is a framework, and there are many such frameworks, each having its own views. From the perspective of the other frameworks, Yoga’s answers to the creation of the world may not appear satisfactory or complete. It is also possible that some of these frameworks have a better answer or a better way of explaining answers. An important feature of any framework is that it should provide a way to experience reality, and then to understand that experience. If the framework can come to our level of understanding and then take us to new heights, it works for us. Sometimes a complex architecture ends up having a bad implementation. Probably, to avoid complexity, Yogis seems to follow the “keep it simple” philosophy. Let us see if it works for us.









Please look at the rectangle any rectangle.Try to see how your eyes and mind react to it. Typically, your eyes look first at one side and then the other side. You may notice the color of the borders. Your mind will try to find some specific details, and thereby, attempt to categorize or label the shape into familiar shapes and figures. It may even say that this is foolish and a waste of time! 
please look at the rectangle again, with three additional conditions:
Look at all four sides of the rectangle at the same time. 
Lock your eyes on the edges only. 
Do not focus on the color or texture of the rectangle or the inside details or to the border.

Try looking at the rectangle with these three conditions fulfilled. Notice if there is any difference in yiuyr awareness.

When our eyes focus on all four sides of a rectangle, and we do not focus on details, we are doing two things. We are arresting the movement of the eyes, and we are stopping the mind’s tendency to break things into pieces. When we prevent our eyes from moving, the energy we consume moving the eyes, becomes free. Likewise, when the mind does not analyze, it does not get lost in details; this makes the energy available. When we do not divert this energy into any other action or thought, it takes us to the consciousness. For this reason, we feel that we are becoming more and more conscious. 



Samkhya tells us that just as the child is brought about by the union of man and woman, the creation is brought about by the union of energy and consciousness.



What is Prana?
Author:
	In sage Patanjali eight-step system, this is the fifth step. Saint Dnyaneshwar described this step as “slippery slopes at the base of a tall mountain”. It is expected that we slip few times before succeeding at this stage.

Reader: How breathing in Yoga is different from breathing in other physical exercises?
 
How Breathing In Yoga Is Different From Breathing In Other Physical Exercises?
Author: Every physical exercise teaches us how to breathe properly. A good breathing is needed to supply oxygen to all body parts. A student, that does not follow correct breathing, will find it very hard to sustain that physical exercise. 
	Similar to other exercises, Yoga has physical poses. Hence, Yoga has a special breathing technique. It is called as Pranayama. It is a composite two words, Prana and Ayama. “Ayama” means to “restraint”.      
Can 


Most of us know that Yoga as set of poses and breathing exercises. Some of us venture into meditative side like deep meditation to experience of Universal Consciousness, called as Samadhi. Thus, we see that Yoga takes us from our current level of consciousness to Universal Consciousness.
	Imagine two semi-circles that join to become a circle. The first semi-circle is Yoga. It takes us from current level of consciousness to Universal Consciousness. The second is semi-circle Samkhya. It tells us how Universal Consciousness becomes our current consciousness. 



In addition, our mind keeps asking – Why? Why not remain the same way? We want to go back to the way things were. Suddenly, the old jail looks like a new house!

Essentially, they reflect that we are in a pre-union condition and we are ready to experience the union condition.

They come together to help each other and achieve their goal.  
By doing physical poses and focusing on breathing, we increase level of energy in body. Those poses mainly work on spine, which allows the energy to flow to the top of the head. The increased energy then unites with consciousness to create relatively higher consciousness than before. Eventually, we experience the Universal Consciousness, the highest level of consciousness. 


According to the mystic side of Yoga, home of energy in our body is called Muladhar Chakra or Root Center and it as Earth as its life-element. We saw that during creation, energy created Earth life-element as the fifth life-element. Energy also created Water, Fire, Air, and Space in sequence, in the reverse order. 

Wait a second. We are going rather too fast. When we come across sentences like “throw away contents of mind or empty the mind etc.”, it scares us. We worked very hard to accumulate those contents.  They are very valuable to us. Letting them go is not easy for us. Hence, we are afraid that if we lose the accumulated contents of the mind, then what will we be? Our identity hangs on to them. And that is not all – behind the fear of losing the identity, there is a monumental and gut-wrenching fear of death. It is our biological survival instinct – there is absolutely no way to get around it. In addition, our mind keeps asking – Why? Why not remain the same way? We want to go back to the way things were. Suddenly, the old jail looks like a new house!
	Questions and dilemma’s like these are surely going to visit us at this stage. We have to discover and confront them. Neither sage Patanjali nor any other great person can answer them for us. It’s up to us to walk to the last line. Only an experience of consciousness will truly convince us.


The Energy creates a Space life-element. Thereafter, within the Space life-elemement, the energy creates Air, Fire, Water, and finally Earth life-elements, in that sequence. The Energy also creates three guna – Rajas, Tamas, and Sattva. We will see more details about these in later sections. 
The three gunas and their relation to the consciousness are the most significant findings of Yoga. 


We think that they are very valuable to us. Letting them go is not easy for us

Let us look at the Chakra or the Energy Centers as we experience them in the path of energy in our body. The home of the energy in our body is called the Muladhar Chakra or the Root Center, and it has Earth as its life-element. During creation, the energy created the Earth life-element as the fifth and the last element. The energy created Water as the fourth life-element, which is an life-element of the Swadhisthan Chakra or Enjoyment Center in our body. The energy created Fire as the third life-element, which is the element of the Manipur Chakra or the Power Center. Before that, the energy created Air as the second life-element, the life-element of the Anahat Chakra or the Heart Center. At first, the energy created Space as the first life-element, the life-element of the Vishuddh Chakra or the Throat Center. 

In highly advanced yogi, energy ascends to Sahastrar, home of Consciousness, and leaves Root Center for good. At that instance, energy takes contents of the Earth life-element with it to the next center, which is Swadhisthan Center. Swadhisthan Center has Water as its life-element, which dissolves the Earth life-element into the Water life-element. So in the process of de-creation, the last created life-element vanishes into one created before. Hence, it is important to remember their sequence.
When energy moves to Manipur Center, it takes contents of the Water life-element with it. Manipur Center has Fire as its life-element, which consumes the contents of the Water life-element. From there, energy goes to Anahat Center or Heart Center, which has Air as its life-element. Here energy dissolves the Fire life-element in the Air and finally, energy moves to Throat Center. 
The Throat Center has Space as its life-element, which consumes the Air life-element of Heart Center. At this stage, energy has dissolved Air life-element into Space life-element, and only Spaces life-element remains. At this instance, the energy is essentially an energetic Space life-element. Yogis identified this special state with a name as “Marut.” 
At Throat center, the Space life-element finally dissolves the Air life-element from Heart Center. Thus, energy dissolves contents of all five life-elements and it moves to Third Eye center. The dissolution of one life-element into another life-element in reverse order of their creation, until no life-elements are remaining is Yoga. I wish I could understand this statement, but, as of now, I am doing copy-paste of statements from a highly advanced yogi. 
Third Eye Center is associated with an intense spirit of enquiry amongst other qualities as intuition and knowledge. From Third Eye Center, energy moves to Sahastrar, in which there is neither spirit of enquiry nor sense of “I.” 
At Sahastrar, energy merges into Consciousness. This merger completes the cycle that started when energy separated from Consciousness. At Sahastrar, we are only aware, as awareness is the only quality of Universal Consciousness that was before its division into two. 
Note that all these events happen for a highly advanced yogi, as we cannot expect the same experience for a beginner. However, even a beginner will be able to experience and see these events unfolding in his body-mind, to some degree. The word Yoga itself means, “Coming together.” Yoga is the path of experiencing merger of energy and Consciousness. When this merger happens, Consciousness will get absorbed into itself, and the person goes into trance or Samadhi. It is the best experience we can have as we can witness the merger energy and Consciousness within ourselves. Truly, it is not an experience as none of the senses is functioning. There is no “I” sense and no feeling of separation.



When the seer observes
no agents of action (no “doer”)
other than the gunas,
and knows the transcendent
beyond the gunas,
such a one attains My being.

“When one rises above the three gunas that originate in the body; one is freed from birth, old age, disease, and death; and attains enlightenment” (Bhagavad Gita 14.20)

 The three gunas of energy cease to transform into further transformations and they recede back into energy. At that time, pure Consciousness becomes established in its true nature.

Entire world is composed of the three gunas .
http://www.sas.upenn.edu/religious_studies/graduate

To conclude the topic of Dharana, let us see the compare the 8 steps of Yoga to climbing the mountain. Saint Dnyaneshwar gave this comparison. First two steps of Yoga (Yama and Niyama) are like a trail at the base of mountain. Steps 3 (Asana) is like a climbing the slope of the mountain. Step 4 (Pranayama) is climbing a steep slope. Step 5 (Pratyahara) is like climbing a cliff at the very top of the mountain.

Mind is like a first generation smart phone. Those phones could do lot of things, but their battery would run out quickly! 

Now, he not only owned the bread, hut, or the farm, but he owned the entire kingdom. Instead of being a beggar, he was the master of all land and people.

A little attention to a body tells us that there is some or the other painful sensation. There are other sensations within body as well.

Testing from other machine

Let us go even deeper into this definition. Any sensation has two components. First component is the Consciousness, which allows us to be aware of that sensation. The second component is an energy. Body is physical. It needs energy to move. Every sensation to work, there has to be some energy associated with it. Hence, Prana is defined as a form of energy. We know that we cannot create or destroy energy. We use it or convert it into other forms.

When a body part like, like heart, or becomes so sick that it cannot function, then Prana cannot operate it. The heart stops beating. Then, Prana leaves the body.

. We easily understand the term autonomous. We also understand the term neutral. However, the term sensation needs more clarification. 

We know for sure that when a person dies, his body does not feel any sensation. Hence, we can be certain that the sensations die with that person. 


The verse is ananta-samapatti. The Sanskrit root "ana" means breath, as in prana. The word samapatti means "to merge or to focus". 
----
Let us look at a most common question: Why do we take Easy Pose/Sukhasana for meditation? Does resting on couch classify as pose according to sage Patanjali? Answer is no. 
	We chose Easy Pose/Sukhasana for meditation because it is very energy efficient pose. When we sit cross-legged, energy circulates between legs. This pose automatically makes our spine straight. It helps to send energy towards head via spine. In addition, when a person goes in deep meditation, he loses the bodily awareness. At that time, Easy Pose holds the body in balance.

----
Pranayama is a very critical step in Yoga. Hence, let us explore it from various other angles.

The verse is ananta-samapatti. The Sanskrit root "ana" means breath, as in prana, apana, etc. The word samapatti means "to merge".

 so ananta-samapatti means

There is a big gap between sage Patanjali and us regarding the definition of pose. 
We think of getting out of that pose. We cannot focus on anything at all.


	Anyone, who has done few hours of Yoga, has these questions in mind: Why am I twisting and punishing my body? What happens when I do these poses?

A student of Yoga should not waste his precious energy in trivial matters.   

When we read above line, most people, including myself, misread it and we force mind to stop. It does not work. Above line is similar to saying, “when fog gets lifted, we see clearly”. It is telling us a fact or law. 

We also assume that we are “good citizens” and therefore, these lists are not applicable to us. It is a very costly mistake. 


To address our concern of not having a peaceful mind, the solution is to stop mind from running all the time. It will give us peace we desire. From Consciousness’s side, when it experiences the natural state of pure observer, it will know itself. However, there is no mention of energy. How will energy get liberated?
	In first line, sage Patanjali tells us, “This is the law/discipline/order/framework of Yoga”. It indirectly addresses energy’s concern. 


When we think about above sentence, we get more questions. When it says, energy needs to be liberated it implies that it is currently in bondage. What is the nature of this bondage? 
	When above sentence says, Consciousness wishes to know “who am I?” it implies that it does not know itself.  wishes something
	Now, we know that when a man and woman get married, 


	
	Let us go to the very beginning. We know that sage Patanjali was greatly influenced by Samkhya.  In Yoga, it means union of energy and Consciousness. 

We have seen the concepts of spiritual paths. We also saw that each path has its key words. Their meaning depends upon the path. Yoga is one such a key word used in all paths.
	



These descriptions are very easy to understand. Take any object, like a pen or pot. It is made out of some material. That material is made of very small atoms. When we keep looking deeper, we see that even those atoms are made of energy. This is the view of Physics. Now, we regularly split atoms and create lot energy for us. This energy is always active and it does not perceive anything. On other hand, every living being, like us, has a Consciousness. We can easily find both of these within us very easily. The material part - bones etc. is energy. The thinking, feeling and sensing etc. happen due to Consciousness.

When we talk about sage Patanjali, the first thing that comes to our mind is his famous words. He wrote, “YogaH chitta vrutti nirodhaH”, meaning, “Yoga is a calming of latent tendencies of mind”. These words describe the outcome of the process of Yoga.


Reader: This is very interesting. I do not know why I am praying in front of an idol. When I think about it does not make sense to pray at all.

Shri Ram level of Consciousness is our only window to see the Universal Consciousness. Shri Krishna, Buddha, and many other great gurus, who operate from Universal Consciousness, have created lot of literature to help us. However, we do not understand their wor
ds.  and 
Consciousness is like a lame man – it has a power to see, but it cannot move. Energy is like a blind man – it has a power to move, but it cannot see.

Samkhya likes to define a concept and give us a number or count about that concept. For example, the first verse of Samkhya Karika says, “There are three types of misery”. The number system that we use today originated in India.  Samkhya’s obsession with counting numbers may have given rise to creation of number system.


We all know that Yoga focuses on poses/Asana and breathing techniques/ Pranayama. Some people know that there are gestures/Mudra and how to use them. Sage Patanjali and others focused on practice aspect of “how” Most people do know that Yoga owe its origin to


Do you remember any conflict, in any history, where two intelligent men decided to kill each other, just because they belong to different religio
n? 

Even those, who are expert in it, may slip or deviate from the path.

Some people think, “Yoga that is true to its Indian roots is true Yoga”. Therefore, they try to “protect” its Indian roots.

Today we see that market savvy sellers use Sanskrit chants or images of AUM etc. to their products. By adding these  


o	The cause of sensation is irrelevant to Consciousness.   

o	Buddha has explained the cause and effect related to these complex phenomena very well. Let us see his sutra called as “Chain of Dependent Origin”.
1.	When we are not aware/conscious/watchful, a deep-rooted mind pattern (Sankhara) becomes active
2.	Due to that deep-rooted mind pattern becoming active, impure Consciousness arises
3.	Due to impure Consciousness, mind and body arises
4.	Due to mind and body, six senses arise
5.	Due to six senses, contact of senses (with outside world) arises
6.	Due to contact with senses, the sensation arises
7.	Due to sensations, cravings and aversion arises
8.	Due to craving or aversion, clinging arises
9.	Due to clinging, the process of becoming arises
10.	Due to process of becoming, birth happens
11.	Due to birth, ageing and death arise
12.	Due to the aging and death, together with sorrow, lamentation, physical and mental sufferings arises. Thus arises this entire mass of suffering.
Buddha also told us how to break this chain. 
1.	When we are aware/conscious/watchful, a deep-rooted mind pattern (Sankhara) does not arise
2.	When deep-rooted mind pattern, the impure Consciousness cease to exist
3.	When impure Consciousness ceases, the mind and body ceases
4.	When mind and body ceases, the six senses cease
5.	When six senses are not there, there is no contact of senses (with outside world)
6.	When there is no contact with senses, there are no sensation
7.	When there are no sensations, the cravings and aversion do not arise
8.	When there are no craving or aversion, the clinging does not happen
9.	When there is no clinging, the process of becoming stops
10.	When there is no process of becoming, the birth does not happen
11.	When there is no birth, the ageing and death does not happen
12.	Without the aging and death, all the sorrow, lamentation, physical and mental sufferings does not happen. Thus, entire mass of suffering does not arise.





o	Some scientists believe that Consciousness arises in our brain. By this logic, they conclude that Consciousness is a quality of the body. However, dead body exists without Consciousness in it. Hence, Consciousness is not a quality of the body. 

o	Yoga says that its final stage, Samadhi, is similar to sleep state, except that there is full awareness in Samadhi.


If you are able to fulfill pre-conditions mentioned above, you are ready to learn about spirituality. 


How Does Spirituality Define “Living a Good Life”?
Author: 	Something we think “I have a limited time on Earth. I spent majority of this time in basic needs and getting to a certain place in life. Even then, things that I do not want happen. Things that I want do not happen. Before I know, old age and death start to sneak up upon me. Everything I collected around me will be left here and I will be no more! I did not even begin to live life, and death will snatch it away from me.”	
	Above paragraph indicates our attachments to things and life in general. These lines show fear of losing possessions and death. They mean an unavoidable misery. 




Why and how are we conscious?

The sensations release the conscious particles, and they go to the top of head. Consciousness uses this capability of mind to create sensations all over the body to create sensations. 

o	Body is made from five life-life-elements. Even if there is no Earth life-life-element, the Space life-life-element still remains, and it will generate sensations. 	

with a single pole (monopole magnet)

o	Consciousness, using the five sense organs and mind as a sense organ, continuously generate the sensations in entire body. 
by experimenting with it. 

Therefore, in this book, we will use concrete methods of Yoga to explain Consciousness.


o	The choice of word “enjoyer” puzzles us. We could understand pleasant sensations as an enjoyment, but there are unpleasant sensations for the body too. We can understand Gita’s statement if, the Consciousness enjoys both of them.

Gautam Buddha and Ananda, his disciple, were passing through a forest. They had just crossed a small stream. Buddha is an old man, and he says to Ananda, "I am feeling very thirsty, you just go back and from that stream bring me some Water in my bowl." Ananda took the bowl and went back. But meanwhile a few bullock carts had passed through the stream and had disturbed its Water completely; it had become muddy. The Water was not drinkable. So Ananda went back to Buddha told what happened. Buddha said, "Just go there and wait. The dirt will settle and, soon the Water will be clear." Ananda did not want to go, but Buddha insisted "Don't change your mind, just go back." Ananda went back and was surprised to see that the Water was as crystal-clear! All that was foreign - the dirt, the dead leaves - had all gone. The Water had come to its purity. He filled the begging bowl of Gautam Buddha. But Ananda he was aware of the question, "Why was Buddha so adamant that I have to come back here to bring Water? I could have brought it from another stream. Why this stream? There must be some reason." And as he came back towards Buddha the reason became clear. The leaves and the dirt, which are not natural to the stream, are bound to leave the stream as stream is always flowing. Same is true about our thoughts, our emotions, our sentiments etc. They all are foreign to our Consciousness. If we just wait patiently, they all will disappear without any effort on our side. Our purity will assert itself on its own accord. 




It will keep discussions easy to understand and interesting. 

This book describes the process of Yoga. It explains, “What is Consciousness? and how Yoga leads to Consciousness?” 

In this book, we will define the term ‘Spirituality’

We will see that we can be spiritual in different ways and reach the same goal. It helps us understand several aspects of Consciousness.


. My eyesight did catch your presence, but chose not to pay attention. 


As noted in the question above, we do not need to be spiritual to live a good life. We can “live a good life” in many ways. Everyone has his idea of what a good life is. Everyone tries his best to live it. Spirituality offers an idea of “living a good life”. Spirituality has lot of experience. Spirituality helps us alleviate this fear of death. It avoids the misery. It teaches us to live life in present moment, without creating bonds of attachments. 
Hence, its idea of “good life” is worth studying. As both Shri Krishna and Lord Buddha have said, wise men take the path of spirituality.





	Reading and writing about Consciousness is difficult, verbose, and boring. To keep this book interesting, we will keep this book short and in a question-answer format. We will see many stories in this book. They help understand various aspects of Consciousness.

According to the story, Lord Vishnu took the Mohini avatar, cheated the demons, and delivered the elixir to the gods to make them victorious. The avatar stories do not include the Mohini avatar among one of the ten incarnations of Lord Vishnu. This exclusion seems confusing; it becomes evident when we go over the story of Bhasmasur. 


A fish, which is always under Water, yet cannot see Water. We are ignorant about the Consciousness, 

Over a period, these reactions become habits. Consciousness saves these habits for 
later use.

However, there are certain pre-conditions. When we do breathing exercises, it pushes breath all over the body. At the same time, we are aware of every sensation within body. We do not react to the painful sensation and wish it to go away. We are not attach to the pleasurable sensations, and expect it to remain it that way


16.	We react to a sensation. If sensation is pleasurable, we want it to continue. This is a craving reaction. If sensation is painful, we want it to stop. This is an aversion reaction. For every sensation, there is a reaction. The type of reaction does not matter. As long as the reaction exits, it gives feedback to Consciousness that this particular thought or feeling is working very well, which means it created lot of sensations. These sensations are signal to Consciousness to keep having the same thought or feeling. Without the reaction, mind cannot get feedback, as if the electric circuit is not complete. In that case, mind stops running that thought or feeling. Not reacting to sensations is the only way to make mind pure.

For example, if we keep eating sugar, soon it becomes tasteless. 

1.	The sensations are of two types – with a cause and without a cause. When ears hear a sound, we know that the sensation is caused by the sound that hit ears. There are sensations all over body that are without any cause. The movement of Air in lungs is without any cause. They are called Pranic sensa


Often, two pieces of information contradict each other. Nevertheless, we can loosely string these bits and pieces together! 

Generally, we come up with a precise definition to understand a concept. However, if someone defines a term A using term B and then defines the term B by referring to term A, then the definitions become illogical, confusing, and wrong. We acknowledge that when we come to Consciousness, it can be expressed using other concepts, which in turn points back to Consciousness. For that reason, it is defined as “Not that, not that, not that”. 
We do not have a precise definition of Consciousness. 

There are many other similar indicators. They all are mystical in nature. 

Some other answered it as “if you try to find it, you cannot find it; if you look closely, you are Consciousness”.   

The concept of Consciousness explained here is a product of eastern culture. 

However, when we come to Consciousness, it defined using other concepts, which in turn points back to consciences. 

You have to take one position, like “there is no Consciousness” or “everything is Consciousness” or anything in between. It is similar to finding a suitable spot on moving merry-go-round. After that, y

Science cannot prove Consciousness and it is not even a scientific term. I am not interested into Spirituality. I do not want to get into Yoga. 

The characters of these stories relate to Consciousness. They help understand various aspects of Consciousness. Many of these stories are from Ramayana. Shri Ram, hero of Ramayana, represents Consciousness and other characters represent processes in Yoga.

We, as a humanity, do not have a clear idea of the Consciousness.

This is a very difficult question. Both 

, which is a part of philosophy and religion

Science has not yet come up with a way to understand the Consciousness. Hence, we have to turn to spiritualit
y. 
We will review the current scientific view later in this book. it does not mean that we know nothing about Consciousness.
The collective knowledge of humanity about Consciousness is stored in the philosophy and religion 

1.	Breath has Air and an energetic part in it. Since mind is all over the body, the energetic part of breath must reach all over body. 
 Even when someone makes a best efforts to expresses, they get a feeling that they could not express it completely.

Reader: How does spirituality define “living a good life”? 


Any person, who has no interest in these topics, will not read this book. In addition, any answer that I could give will not satisfy him. Nevertheless, this is a question is valid, for those, who are committed to studies of these type of topics. The answer is a resounding yes, it is surely worthwhile to peruse these topics, and these pursuits are not in vain.

Consciousness And Yoga and Ramayana


1.	Consciousness is a field; it has no mass, so there is no way to interact with it directly. The only way to interact with is through mind and sensations. 
2.	We can experience Consciousness in present moment only. 


Reader: What is the use of being a good person, when there is so much evil all over the world?
Reader: I think we should educate society first, and 
Author: 
It is hard to imagine that any of us will be able to finish the study of spirituality in our lifetime. We all are co-travelers in this long journey.

A student of spirituality will be able to face death without fear. This is the single most important test and value of spirituality.

We can classify all of above information as identity, memory, or emotions. 


Consciousness is similar to the magnetic field. Instead of north and south poles, Consciousness has two centers – one at the top of the head and one at the bottom of spine. In Yoga, we call them Sahastrar and Muladhar Chakras. In Yoga, top of the head is treated as north side and bottom of the spine as south side. Instead of green and red colors of magnet, we have orange and blue colors in body.
		Due to constant interaction between these two centers, the conscious field is created and sustained. Energy flows from bottom of spine towards top of head and to the rest of the body. There is unites with Consciousness, which in term, comes down through spine and all over the body. A strong energy center produces strong conscious field and vice-versa. The correct term to describe the field is “energy-conscious field”. Consciousness is simplified name of energy-conscious field. It is similar to describing an electromagnetic field as magneticness, which is not an English word!
	In magnet, north and south poles divide magnet in middle. According to Yoga, these centers dominate entire body. Muladhar Chakra, which is a source of energy, has its lines spreading all over the body. Yoga calls the Nadis. Yoga estimates that there are 72,000 nadis carry energy through the body. It also means that Sahastrar, which is a source of Consciousness, also spreads Consciousness all over the body. Together, we get the energy-conscious field, in which our body exits. 
	Yoga asserts that the energy-conscious field comes first and body is secondary. In other words, energy-conscious field arranges our body to suit itself. The energy-conscious field creates and holds our body using five life-elements created by energy, generated at Muladhar Chakra (Earth, Water, Fire, Air, and ether) and Consciousness, generated at Sahastrar. If the energy-conscious field weakens below certain level, we die. Even if we die, the energy-conscious field can carry and assume the ownership of next body.
	The entire process of Yoga is to strengthen this energy-conscious field, so that it can go higher and higher levels. At the highest level, this energy-conscious field expands exponentially. It is called as Samadhi. The word “Bramha” means expanding Consciousness. There are many terms in Yoga that point to same expanding Consciousness. We will use the term Universal Consciousness. Sage Patanjali described as the eighth and final step of Yoga. Many yogis all over the world have reported experience of Universal Consciousness. It gives us a confidence that Universal Consciousness is a real thing, and not a figment of imagination.
Reader: How does the experience of Universal Consciousness feel?


It is unclear (to me) if the body comes first or the consciences come first. 

Yoga has a pose called as The “Seated Forward Bend Pose” or “Paschimottanasana“. The word “Paschim” means west and “ottan” means rise. The name means rise of energy from west side of body! The spine is at the west side of the body and energy rises through it.



. At the time of birth of Shri Ram, Sage Durvasa told us a story that happened long time ago. Once there was a war between the gods and the demons. When the demons were losing the war, they took shelter of sage Bhrigu’s wife. At that time, she gave them an assurance of safety. Lord Vishnu, the commander of god’s side, became angry when He saw that they had taken shelter of Bhrigu’s wife. With His sharp-edged discus, He decapitated sage Bhrigu’s wife. When the sage Bhrigu saw that his wife had been killed, he became furious. He cursed Lord Vishnu, “Because You killed my wife though she did not deserve it, You will take birth in the mortal world and live in separation from Your wife for many years.” Lord Vishnu said, “I have accepted the curse which you uttered for the benefit of the world.” Lord Vishnu has descend to this world as Shri Ram. 


This is my (normal) Consciousness. That is (Universal) Consciousness. My (normal) Consciousness is a part of (Universal) Consciousness. (The reason I know this to be true is that) when Consciousness divides into parts, it remains Consciousness.

Why and how Universal Consciousness loses its Universal state? 

 
Why and How Universal Consciousness Loses Its Universal State?
In this infinite Universal Consciousness, for reasons we do not know of, there arises a spirit of enquiry concerning itself. Being Consciousness, it is aware of itself, so the question “Who am I?” arises in it without any words or associated concepts.
Yogis say that the Universal Consciousness wishes to know itself. It is one; it wants to be many.



They are honest, hard-working, and proud people. 
. They are not judgmental towards other people. 

	Some of them practice Yoga primarily its health, body, and mind benefits. Some join Yoga to fix their back pain or other bodily problem. Some join Yoga because it is accessible to all body types, shapes, and age. Some like Yoga because it is a go-at-your-pace, non-competitive exercise, and it gives Space for themselves. Some go to Yoga classes to meet other people and enjoy the belonging to a group feeling. Someone may do Yoga for wrong reasons, and still get the benefits of doing Yoga!

What are the energy centers? How do I activate them?


What is Conscousness? 
The word ‘Consciousness’ refers to one's awareness. This awareness may be of thoughts, memories, feelings, sensations and environment. When an individual knows that his attention is on a pertucular place or thught. This awareness exists in all our body parts. This awareness works behind the scene. Our sense organs come in contact with other objects. for ex., ears listen to music. The ears come in contact with sound. The ears can 'hear' the sound because there is a Consciousness in the ears. When a person is dead, there is no Consciousness in their body and their ears, so they cannot hear. Thus, it is the consciouenss that works behinds the senses and enables them to function. Our body gets old but the Consciousness is does not change.
If an individual does not know that he is percieving somethingm then he is not Consciousness. 
This defination of Consciousness is simple to understand. But Yoga uses this term in much broader way. 
Sages tell us that just as our body has Consciousness, the entire world also has same Consciousness. This is not just a theoritical concept. When a Yogi enters into Samadhi, the state of higer conscoiusness, he experiences the entire world as consious.  


here is one more way to understand this term. Yoga says there are four state of Consciousness that we experience. First is awake state where we are aware of ourselves.  Second state is Dreame state. There is a Deep Sleep state, where we are not aware of being awake or dreaming.

What does Science say about Consciousness?

 
Why Yoga?
	
Reader asks: Why should I do Yoga?
Author: Yoga poses can be very challenging. They provide very good exercise. Yoga improves balance, flexibility, and muscle strength. It increases blood flow, boosts immunity, and maintains nervous system. It increases digestive power and reduces weight. It improves lung capacity, which helps breathe better. It helps focus, helps sleep deeper, and gives piece of mind.

Reader asks: These are the same benefits as any other exercise. What is so special about Yoga?
Author:
 
The Consciousness is neutral. It is very hard to notice. It is like Air – we are unable to smell it unless some scent is added. Energy is vibrant. It is much more natural to feel. Which is why, in Yoga, we focus more on energy.
In physics, an atom has a core with positive and neutral components. The Consciousness is like the core of an atom except for the positive charge in it. It is always neutral and is the primary life sustaining force. The energy is like an electron except for the negative charge in it. It is always in motion and is attracted to the neutral Consciousness. 



Limits of Higher Consciousness
Author: The collection of stories answers difficult questions using an easy to understand story. They are called as Purana. In these stories, Lord Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva are the gods   represent higher Consciousness. 


 
I have so many questions. 

 

Reader: What are levels of Consciousness?

Ramayana may be helpful in learning Yoga. But, before I agree, I have several questions. 




Define yoga
Where do I begin this journey?
What benefits will this journey give me? Higher Consciousness
What knowledge do I need before beginning?
The importance and history of Ramayana
Difficulties I may face

 
We begin where we are. We do not have experience of higher Consciousness and we do not understand the term higher Consciousness.


Parag dash Gandhe 
Navin Pustak in 2 hajar aathara
git clone https://github.com/parag-gandhe/ConsciousnessViaYoga.git



git config --global user.email "parag.gandhe@gmail.com"
